From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hanselman. It's a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologist Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. And this is Lawrence Ryan
announcing show number one 19
recorded live Wednesday, June 18,
2008. Support for Hanselman it's
as provided by Tellerik already
controls the most comprehensive suite
of components for windows forms
and asp.net web applications online@wwwdottelerik.com
and by the code better
blog network, delivering tried and
true solutions to real world
problems for building better software
online@covid.com. Support is also provided
by.net developers journal. The world's
leading.net developer magazine online at
www dot  dot com.
In this episode, Scott talks
with scrum creator and founder
of the agile Alliance, Ken
Schwaber. Hi, this is Scott
Hanselman and, and it's just
another episode of Hansel minutes.
And I'm sitting here in
Oslo, Norway with Ken Schwaber,
the co-inventor of scrub founder
of the agile Alliance and
all around agile advocate. We
were lucky enough to be
on an agile panel this
morning with a number of
agile luminaries, but I'm sitting
down here with Ken and
we're going to talk about
agile agility software process. But
you had said, sir, that
you thought that one of
the things that needed to
be talked about was what
is done. Yes. Which was
surprising to me that that
was what she thought was
the most interesting thing we
should talk about. What is,
what is the definition of
done? Well, Don is, is
a very simple word. And
bill Clinton started this with
simple words. When he talked
about his, during his presidency,
Don is, is something where
if I come into a
company and they say, Oh,
we're using scrum. It's a
smell for me about whether
they're using scrum or not.
So if I turn to
the person, who's a customer
or even the team, and
I say, what is your
definition of done? And they
give me kind of a
blank. Look to me, this
is a smell that they
haven't addressed. One of the
key issues in scrum. And
that is when they select
some items that they are
going to do for a
sprint that is some items,
some requirements and product backlog
items, some stories that they've
said that they will do
for the customer during an
iteration, which we call a
sprint and they don't know
what done or do is
this certainly raises a question
to me about how they
know what they're doing, because
if they don't know what
done is that, is, is
it coded? Is it unit
tested after it's been coded?
Is it is maybe even
refactor. Does it include a
design review, a code review?
Does it include performance testing?
Does it, what does it
include? And if that person
or that team that's working
on things for the customer
doesn't know what done is.
Then you have to ask
a question about how do
they know how many things
they should select during an
iteration. If it's just coded
and maybe unit tested, maybe
they can do 10 or
12 or maybe even 20
items during a whole sprint.
It is so both analyzed,
designed, there's been a unit
test. There's been coding, there's
been testing, there's been refactoring
and the whole set of
things that need or needed
to be done for it
to be potentially shippable. Then
maybe they could only do
one thing. So you have
to wonder how they know
how many things to select
from the product backlog to
do. If they don't know
what done is this also
raises the question of what
sort of expertise or engineering
skills do they have if
they're not sure what they
do when they select something
to be done. And this
of course then raises the
question of undone work when
they get done with a
sprint, and they've done five
things for a product owner,
the product owner, if maybe
the total have done things
that they need are 30,
might believe that they're one,
six of the way complete
and ready for shipment. However,
if the team Stephanie done,
Donnie's only coded and unit
tested, maybe the product owner
is only one 40th of
the way done. And when
the team gets done with
the six sprint and says,
here we are product owner
we're done. And the cut
product owner says, great let's
ship. Then the team has
to look him in the
eye and say, well, that's
not quite the definition of
done. We had, now we've
got to do all the
rest of the testing and
the refactoring and the stabilizing
of the code to make
it. So it's really shippable.
So maybe in about two
or three months. So this
is why done for me
tends to be a pretty
big issue of engineering skills
of, of the relationship between
the product owner and the
customer and engineering competence of
the team that's doing the
work. It sounds like from
the, the way that you're
painting it, that done is
the only, the only point.
I mean, if it also
seems like one could build
up a great deal of
technical debt, even within just
a few short iterations, but
more importantly, that sitting down
and at step zero saying
what has done for us
could expose a number of
technical deficiencies in an organization
you're really kind of, you're
illustrating that there could be
a cancer in the organization.
Like we have virtually no
technical writing, or we have
a, you know, in insufficient
integration testing. So we might
not even be able to
appropriately begin a sprint until
we work these other things
out. Well, if I, if
I listed the number of
things to be done to
a customer requirement before it's
potentially shippable, I've tried that
and the list is about
45 to 50 items, things
that need to be done.
And if a team is
only capable, if you go
through this with its set
of group of engineers, group
of developers, which includes programmers,
analysts, designers, QA people, documentation
people, and say, how much
of this can you do
in a sprint? It's very
often that they can only
do 15 or 20. They're
going to look at a
whole bunch of those, like
the performance testing, the quality
testing, their regression testing. And
they're going to say, well,
we, we, we don't know
how to do that yet
in a sprint. And to
me that remains undone work.
If I do six sprints
at the end of the
first sprint, I have some
undone work at the end
of the second sprint. I
have some undone work and
it keeps accumulating. Unfortunately it
doesn't accumulate linearly as you
don't do work sprint after
sprint it piles on. So
you're not doing some work
that's piling onto what you
didn't do in the first
sprint, third sprint, second sprint.
And so the amount of
work that you're not doing
tends to accumulate in some
sort of logarithmic form pattern.
I'm not sure exactly what
it is, but it's certainly
more than linear. Interesting. It
feels like when I did
my first scrum, when, when
the CTO of the company
that I worked at before
I went to work for
Microsoft, brought in some scrum
training and we had a
number of folks become scrum
masters. We put the entire
division, every developer went through
scrum training and we said,
we are doing scrum as
a company. We, we dedicated
ourselves to it. And we
sat down, we started to
ask ourselves what was, what
was done. I started to
realize how little we had
been doing in the past,
which was interesting, but, but
more interestingly, how much, how
much work needs to be
done made us feel like
we were getting less done.
I guess what I'm trying
to say is that we
were concerned when looking at,
at, at scrum that the,
what we perceived as the
most important piece of work,
the code is getting squeezed.
And we're going to spend
all this time writing documentation
and doing, and doing tests
and things like that. Is
that a common perception that
someone says that, well, gosh,
the speed at which we're
getting things done is less
because look, we're having to
do all this administrivia yes.
Just to suit, you know,
just to make someone feel
like we are done, right.
I believe in every programmer's
had, there's a little person
who has a metronome and
the metronome goes at a
certain pace. And if we
don't go at that pace,
then we're falling behind. I
agree. And so if we
take the time to actually
test our code, and this
is the whole range of
testing it, and perhaps even
document it to make sure
that it works as documented,
then we're not going as
fast as we should. And
at that point we kind
of panic and we throw
all that side, all that
stuff over the board, we'll
say, we'll do that later
because that's not really customer
stuff. That's other stuff, Right?
Administration. It's just administrivia we
call it Right. Well, acceptance
test driven development blows all
of us out of water
because you're defining the acceptance
tests that will prove whether
it works right up the
front. And then you go
off and you document it,
you set up the tests
for it, you set up
the code for it. And
then you try that to
see whether it works as
the test describing our works
as the documentation describes. And
that's a complete piece of
code. If it's not you
circle back and get it
complete. If it is, then
you go back and pick
up another piece of code.
Now that's talking about everything
that's customer facing, being done
within a piece of work
called done. It seems to
me like programmers and engineers
are deeply interested in delivering
code. And if we're not
slapping the keyboard and making
our curly braces or whatever
language we're using, we're not
productive. But we, that means
that we're, we're fundamentally disconnecting
with the whole point, which
is to make a happy
customer. Well, if this, this
goes to the point of
a flaw, almost a genetic
cloth that has occurred in
programmers, that's come out from
waterfall. And this is that
we are willing to cut
quality, to increase velocity or
to increase that drum beat
that the little person he
has in her head. Exactly.
And so I can sit
at a desk and I
can do things the right
way, maybe think about how
something's supposed to be done
and where it'll fit in
the design and what after
we factored to do it.
And then the coding for
the test. And that might
take me an hour. But
if someone tells me that
this is really important, I've
got a deadline to meet
and stop fooling around. This
is really serious. I can
do that same work in
10 minutes by only doing
the coding and slapping it
onto something rather than refactoring
it. So that's where we
come up with the idea
that only the code is
what matters. And unfortunately what
this results in then, because
we've done cut through definition
of done is a done
deficit or an undone, which
is where we strangely enough
get are things like high
maintenance, low sustainability software. No,
it feels like there is
a synergy between the, the
scrum methodology and what has
been happening in productivity with
David. Allen's getting things done
way of thinking. It's kind
of like the new Stephen
Covey. I'm not sure if
you're familiar with David, Allen's
getting things done. It's called
GTD. And it's been the
whole concept of, of, of
his, of his productivity style.
Is it one has a
mental backlog of all the
things that are causing you.
Psychic weight is what he
calls it. And a psychic
weight can be everything in
your life from write some
code to clean out the
garage and you can't release
that psychic weight until you've
actually written it down. And
that's backlog items put every
single thing that needs to
be done. Then you can
release that cause it's an,
a trusted source. And then
the most important thing about
his, his solution, which I
think can be, this can
be applied to something like
scrum is the, what is
the next action required to
move this thing forward? Not,
not at the project level,
but what is the very
next action? For example, if
I'm going to paint my
house, that's my backlog item,
paint my house. What is
the very next action required?
Well, it might be something
very trivial, like get the
phone number of the paint,
But it's what I know
what it has to be
rather than me looking for
any paint that I can
find under the table and
starting to paint. Exactly. But
the programmer's mind wants to
just, let's just start painting.
Let's just do, I've got
some paint. Let's just start
slapping paint on the wall.
It'll work itself out. Well,
the most suspicious thing in
any organization are teams that
have a velocity of 10,
12. That might be the
average within the organization. But
another team is able to
get a philosophy of 20,
25. Amazingly, if you look
at their code and the
tests around it, they have
changed the definition of done
to increase that. So can
you say something about velocity?
Cause I don't think necessarily
all of our listeners are
familiar with the concept and
the numbers associated with the
loss. If we have a
list of things that a
customer wants to have done,
this is how many of
those things we're able to
get done as a team
over a period of time,
which might be like a
monthly iteration. So philosophy might
be 20 pieces of requirements,
our product backlog. This we're
going to get done over
a sprint. Now, if you
are able to change the
definition of done to minimize
testing, to minimize, designed, to
minimize refactoring, you can raise
that incredibly. However, if within
an organization, everyone has the
same definition of done Andy,
it's something that's potentially shippable.
Then I can really compare
one team to another. Interesting.
I think that that, that
idea of having a common
agreement across either groups or
divisions makes the, the statistics
have value. Otherwise they're useless,
They are useless and an
interesting way of making it.
So the statistics are relevant
is all the teams that
are working on a similar
set of software. Let's see
a similar release of software
have to have the same
definition of done otherwise their
code won't integrate during the
sprint and won't be integrated
at the end of the
iteration or sprint. And so
this becomes a, an organization
organization wide definition rather than
just simply for a single
team. Let's just take a
moment right now to thank
our sponsors and we'll come
right back with Ken Schwaber
and we'll talk a little
bit more about what is
done. Do you know how
to make the possible out
of the impossible while the.net
ninjas at Telerik do they
just released a huge pack
of web controls, all built
on top of ASP at
Ajax, that'll help you build
impossibly fast and interactive applications
in no time at all.
They've made the impossible possible
and desktop development. If you
think you can't have a
carousel component and wind forms,
well you can. They're windows
form suite features a super
powerful grid view control and
32 other crazy desktop components.
That'll give you a dazzling
WPF like features, but in
wind farms, they do the
same thing in reporting solutions
with a new design surface,
like nothing else looks just
like graph paper gives you
advanced page layout capabilities makes
it feel more like a
graphic design software than a
reporting solution. Go check them
out at  dot com
and be at dotnet Ninja.
And thanks for listening. This
week's Hansel minutes is brought
to you by covid.com the
code better.com blog network it's
made up of over 20
industry leaders and speakers who
are passionate about delivering tried
and true solutions to real
world problems for building better
software. These guys are not
only our sponsor this week,
but they're also my friends.
The COVID better blog network.
It's where industry leaders blog.
You can find them@codebetter.com as
well as devilish dev L
I C I O dot.
Yes. And we're back, we're
talking to catch waiver about
what is done, and you're
going to say something sure
about the relationship that happens
between the customer and the
developer and how, how the
definition of done can affect
that relationship. Yes, we've, we've
talked about how done is
necessary. So a team knows
how many items to select.
And so it knows what
development process it goes through
within a sprint to create
something. And so that there
is no undone work left
at the end of the
project for the team to
stabilize. However, this changes a
longterm and longtime honored relationship
between customers who we now
call product owners and the
developers on the scrum team.
Normally a product owner would
come in if they needed
something more done than they
had anticipated in a project.
And they would tell the
team, Hey, we've got some
more things. We've got some
more stuff for our customers.
We've got some more functionality
that we need to get
into this release. And it's
just critical. And the team
would look up and say,
well, yeah, but we are,
we don't have any more
time to do that. And
the product owner would look
them even more clearly in
the face and say, you
don't understand. This is really,
really important. And team would
say, Oh, now we understand
it's that important that, you
know, if we don't do
it, you're going to go
to our managers, managers, managers.
Now we're all in deep
trouble if we don't do
it. So at this point
in time, the development team
does what would do what
it always has done in
this relationship, which is it
cuts quality. That is, it
reduces the amount of stuff
that is included in. What's
done to simply increase the
amount of stuff can be
claimed as done. And as
I mentioned earlier, they can
vastly increase their velocity by
doing this, they might increase
it by up to four
or five, certainly enough to
accommodate almost any increase in
things that a customer or
product owners are asking for.
I think this has led
to a deep seated belief
by all of our customers
that in general, we sit
around as developers with our
feet up on a desk,
maybe I'm playing with, you
know, are surfing the web
or looking at pornography or,
or doing something. But it's
certainly not doing the work
that they want. And it's
all they have to do
is tell us that it's
really important for us to
do it. And we will
put our feet down and
we'll sit forward and we'll
really crank out the code.
Like we always have. What
they don't know is that
we've cut quality by reducing
the definition of done to
do it. So this changes
the relationship between the product
owner and the team. The
team now has a definition
of done. The definition of
done is something that is
potentially shippable. This is something
which is for quality, it's
maintainable, sustainable enhanceable code. And
yet the product owner doesn't
necessarily know about this. And
so they'll come to the
team and say, guys, you
got to get more done.
And the team can't, the
team is stuck with the
definition of done. And so
their philosophy is fairly static.
You can't change your velocity
by more than five, 10%
within any sprint, by any
technique, other than cutting quality,
adding people, won't do it.
Increasing your engineering tools. Won't
do it. So they have
to really look back at
the product or, and say,
excuse me, but this is
our definition of done. We
can't do any more. So
with the definition of done
being in place, the team
can no longer produce more
by reducing the definition of
done. This leaves the product
owner with the question of
how do they get changes,
taken care of? How do
they get the work that
they're used to asking the
team to do with the
last minute done, scrum kids,
the product owner, the customer,
another variable that they can
work with that they've never
had before this, the ability
to iteratively incrementally build the
product in the past. They've
had to say, this is
everything we want here. It
is, do it. And then
later come in and say,
Oh, by the way, and
do this more now with
the product owner can do
is they can ask for
the product to be built
piece by piece, by piece,
highest value piece, next highest
value piece, next highest value
piece. And when they get
done, when they get done
with all the functionality, they
think is valuable, they can
stop. So this means that
at any point in time,
they can trade off functionality.
That's in the queue to
be built with other functionality.
That's more valuable. This works
extremely well. When you take
two industry statistics into account,
one is 35% of all
functionality changes during a release.
So this is 35% of
the queue of work that
a product owner had wanted
before. That's open for change.
And 50 to 60% of
all functionality in any release
is rarely or never needed.
So what we've given our
product owners is the ability
to piece by piece, manage
what they're getting in the
release. So they can constantly
optimize the value and the
return on investment. They will
never do this as long
as they're used to believing
that all they have to
do is tell the developers
to do more. And the
team will, they'll only do
this when they believe that
that's not an option and
they have to optimize the
value of the release rather
than just trying for more
and more and more. This
is a big change for
our customers. This is a
big change for our developers,
simply by introducing the value
of the word done, we
have changed our relationship and
we've also started to increase
the quality sustainability and making
belty of our products. You,
you, you talked about the
prioritization and the deciding that
what I need to get
done once I've defined what
done is, I can say
I want the most high
value things first. How do
those business needs and ranking
the order in which I
want to finish my backlog
items? How can those constraints
be reconciled with architecturally to
finish this most important business
thing there, we require this,
you know, this, these designs
or this underlayment, or I
simply can't do priority one
thing before priority five, because
of the way that the,
I see the design in
my head, you know, the
natural, the natural value order
of the business need may
not necessarily be a friendly
to the architect, Right? Usually
we're used, we're used to
thinking of architecture is being
done before we start developing
the software. And then we
hang the software from the
architecture and the infrastructure. If
we're listing the work that
the customer wants done, we're
listing the requirements they want.
We're also listening to nonfunctional
requirements that are needed to
support the functional requirements at
the pace at the security,
at the other requirements that
they need. So those are
top priority product backlog items
that need to be done
in scrum, every sprint he
has to have at least
one piece of business functionality.
So in the very first
sprint, we might have one
piece of business functionality and
a lot of architectural infrastructural
items being built. And the
second sprint, we might have
a little more business functionality
and a little less architectural
infrastructure, all of work being
done. This means that in
every sprint, some of the
architecture and infrastructure is going
in, but it emerges. We
don't build it upfront all
at once. We let it
emerge based on the business
requirements. This means at any
point in time, we'll never
have more architecture than the
business functionality that we built
demands. It also though means
that the code that we
write had better be very
clean, very refactored, and very
well documented. Otherwise, when we
get to the second sprinting,
we try laying more code
on top of it. We
will have a bloody mess.
I see. So the more
refined, the more appropriately factored
your code is the more
friendly it is to being
the code itself, being agile
enough to be modified for
future The requirements. Exactly. And
this is where that were
done, really comes into play.
Because if you take a
shortcut with scrum, it's going
to catch up with you
within three or four sprints
now three or four releases.
So what about cross cutting
concerns about things like, you
know, security throughout and logging
throughout and things that don't,
you know, the kinds of
backlog items that one finds
hanging around sprint after sprint,
maybe they're poorly written backlog
items because there's something like
logging. Yeah. So you might
have logging it as a
product backlog item in the
first sprint and it's logging
for this one piece of
functionality. So you're only putting
enough to do that one
piece. Then you in second
sprint, you're doing logging for
another piece, then third piece,
or you might take logging
and break it down into
customer needs, logging, and we
will be logging at this
type of capability. So you
decompose it further and further.
So you're putting in just
enough to support the business
requirement When a, when a
requirement takes a dramatic right
turn in a direction that
you maybe didn't see, someone
builds a logging infrastructure to
log to text files. Suddenly,
you know, the customer changes
the requirement. We need to
log into the cloud and
we're just simply not prepared
for that. We wouldn't have
been prepared if we had
tried things, you have the
architecture upfront. The only difference
is that we won't have
built a lot of things
that we have to tear
apart. Instead, we will be
able to just start from
where I see. So I'm
hearing you say that it's
that accidental, that accidental complexity
that comes from trying to
think too much about the
architecture, what we might need,
as opposed to being driven
by exactly what we were
told we need. If we
look historically, we're driven to
build architecture and infrastructure at
the start of the project,
and if you're using waterfall
that's because if you change
any requirement at the start
of the project, you'd only
cost you a dollar 60%
of the way through the
project. Since we built all
the architecture and infrastructure at
the start, it might cost
us a hundred dollars. So
we try to be perfect
upfront. If we're using the
ideas of refactoring and merchant
architecture, then we don't need
to be perfect. We're constantly
adjusting it to meet the
requirements. However, this does require
tremendously good engineering skills, which
removes your ability to devolve
from the word done into
some crap. And it removes
your ability to fake it.
Yeah. Completely. If you try
faking it with enforced prints,
you'll be caught. Yeah. Interesting.
So suddenly you have a
reason to write really good
software and you always have
a reward for writing really
good software. It's interesting. A
number of people have said
to me that, you know,
I've said this before that
agile is, some people are
using it as an excuse
to be sloppy, but I've
found when I've been working
with really good scrum masters,
it's a much more formal
process than really any process
I've ever worked on. It
has consequences at the end
of every sprint. If everyone's
paying attention, the scrum master
is the one we hold
responsible for the product owner,
knowing what's being seen at
the end of the sprint.
If the definition of done
is that something will be
completely done and tested. The
scrum master is not allowed
to let the product owner
see something that does not
meet that criteria. So they're
like the judge, the referee
in a football game. So
that brings up an interesting
question is what does a
failed sprint look like? And
what do we do about
it? Failed sprint is an
awful phrase. Sprints don't feel
or succeed. They simply think
simply happen within them. Okay.
So if we select some
product backlog items, which have
a lot of architectural work
in it, and we don't
get done with that within
a sprint, because it turns
out bigger than we thought
we will re estimate the
amount of work remaining on
those items and put them
back in the product backlog.
Hopefully the product owner will
re select them for the
next sprint, but they are
not done. They're not demonstrable
simply there are means less
work to be done on
them, But can it be
possible that one would have
a sprint and either because
of the length of the
sprint or the inappropriate size
of the backlog items that
they have, nothing that they
can demonstrate at the end
of the day. Yes, absolutely.
Wonderful. Then we sit down
with them and say, wow,
that was really pretty terrible.
So how can we now
select a more appropriate amount?
Typically teams will, by the
time they get into their
third sprint, know how much
they can select and how
much they can do within
a sprint. It tends to
be a self learning process.
The team has decided to
start using scrum. They don't
have to necessarily take it
all at once, right. They
can just pick something and,
and try to improve that.
Absolutely. And often when they
think they're doing it all
at once and perfectly, they
will discover that they're not,
you know, what they do
have to improve Kind of
preparation should they make for,
for management in the sense
of we're not going to
become immediately and incredibly effective
just because we've moved from
one process to just scrum,
what can they do to
prepare? I mean, how much
overhead is there for the
startup of an agile practice
at a previously not agile?
None. If you prepare, you
will be preparing what you
think is the most important
stuff to grip up here.
And you have no idea
of what the teams are
really going to need so
far better to let a
team start with some product
backlog that they can find
somewhere and do best to
turn it into something that's
done by the end of
a sprint. And in the
process of doing this, you'll
find everything that they don't
know, everything they need to
know. And those then become
the things that you can
put in place to help
them. So it sounds like
the only overhead is just
the act of deciding, deciding,
yup. This is kind of
a Schrodinger's cat view of,
of agile where we, you
know, you're not going to
know until you just open
the box. Absolutely. And this,
I think translates back into
a kind of waterfall approach
of let's plan it and
get it perfect before we
start versus the scrum approach,
which says there's so much
complexity. You can never know
what's needed. So just start
and then you'll know what
you need feels far riskier,
but in scrum, your risk
is never greater than one
sprint. Very cool. Well, that's
all the time we've got,
and I thank you so
much for sitting down with
me today, pinch waiver, and
you'll see you again next
week on Hanselman's. Thank you.